If you have billions, and you argue
against paying a slight marginal tax
increase,
you might be an
>> [music]
>> What should we do with our money? Ramit
Sethi claims to have the answers, but
he's not your typical finance guy.
>> No matter how much you earn, I know you
can live your rich life.
>> To the rich life.
>> [screaming]
>> His book, the bluntly and irresistibly
titled I Will Teach You to Be Rich, has
more than a million copies in print.
[music]
Like any good media entrepreneur, he has
since launched a Netflix show and a
video podcast.
>> What are the financial challenges
between the two of you?
>> The more money she's made, the less
valuable I am.
>> So, why are people listening to him?
>> I want us [music] to get deeper than
thinking that spending money is
frivolous or somehow unimportant. It's
not.
>> Here's my conversation with Ramit Sethi.
>> [music]
>> Ramit, thank you for taking the time to
speak with me today.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> We're going to talk about money.
>> My favorite topic.
>> My problem is I have too much of it. How
do I [laughter]
How do I get rid of some money? That's
my That's really my issue.
>> You do not hear that too often.
>> [laughter]
>> Um so, I just to start, when you talk
about
helping people
become rich,
you don't just mean rich
in a dollar figure way. You you mean it
in a more holistic way. So, can you
explain to people what rich means to you
in the way that you use it?
>> The word rich is extremely loaded in our
culture. When we think of rich, we have
a very specific vision of what that
looks like. For example, in the '80s and
'90s, it was a country club, you know,
maybe a fur coat, a private jet. That's
rich. But, it's quite different now.
Rich could be picking up your kids from
school every afternoon. Rich can be
traveling for a few months a year or
buying a beautiful piece of clothing,
but your rich life is yours.
And we see that especially in the last
few years as people went through work
from home and they realized, hey, I
would actually rather do this for the
rest of my life. It might even mean
taking a small pay cut, but I want the
freedom and the flexibility. So, until
now
I hadn't seen people talk about rich in
a positive way that fits you like a
glove. I saw it in this kind of Richie
Rich on TV vision and that just didn't
connect with me.
>> So, one of your big insights and and to
my mind one of your key insights is that
you you actually encourage people to
spend money on the things that they love
and which they feel will enhance their
lives in a meaningful way.
But if you're going to do that
you need to cut ruthlessly on the things
that that don't enhance your life in a
meaningful way. It Where did that
insight come from that you don't have to
be afraid of spending on certain things?
>> I started my entire business from my
dorm room and I remember at the time
reading a ton of books on money.
And the material that I read on personal
finance
did not connect with me at all. It was
people who didn't look like me
lecturing
me about all the things I'm not allowed
to do with my money.
There was no vision
of what I get. Like I would literally
you put your hand out. I think this is a
powerful exercise for a lot of people
with money. Put your hand out palm up
and ask yourself, what do I get?
What do I get for all the work I'm
doing, for the risks I'm taking, for
sometimes working week What do I get?
And it better be something cool. And I
started to talk to people, what do you
love to spend your money on?
Every person has an answer. And their
eyes light up.
And they'll they'll go, oh,
um [gasps] you know, I love travel. Or I
love um clothes. Okay. And then the next
thing they'll say, depending on what
their answer is, is uh but I know I
probably shouldn't.
And they shrink.
And I never let them.
I go, hey, what do you love? What kind
of what's your favorite piece? Why do
you love it? And then I ask the next
question, if you could spend more on
that thing, what would it look like?
What would it feel like?
This is a very powerful moment because
the vast majority of people have never
been asked this. And they've never been
treated, especially by a money person,
non-judgmentally.
>> But how do people prioritize spending on
the things they love? Because I think if
you were to ask someone, or I mean, this
is what you do for a living, so you
know, and you correct me if I'm wrong,
but if you were to ask someone, you
know, what are the things you love, you
know, people they're not just going to
say one thing. They might say, well, I I
love to travel, I like to I love to eat
out, I love to buy new clothes.
How is someone supposed to know like
at at what point does spending on the
thing they love
it's actually sort of counterproductive
to their larger financial goals?
>> First of all, people do not prioritize
spending on the things they love. That's
not the way people act. And this is one
of the central mistakes that the entire
financial industry makes, which is to
treat people like they are rational
robots. Oh, people they believe that
their children are the most important
thing to them, so therefore they are
apportioning resources accordingly. No,
they're not. They're not doing that at
all. And so when I ask them, what's the
most important thing to you? The answers
are always the same. The number one
thing that people love to spend money on
is food, eating out. Fine. Number two is
travel, number three is health and
wellness. Then we take a look at where
their money is actually going.
It is never aligned, never. And so what
they claim is important to them is not
reflected on their calendar and in their
spending plan. And that's where we get
the opportunity to change things. So,
>> if someone were listening to you today
and and thought, "Okay, I'm I'm willing
to cut back on some things that mean
less to me and I'm willing to give
myself permission to spend more on
things that mean more to me." Like that
that's not sufficient. What are the
other things they need to be doing to
put themselves on more stable or not
just more stable financial ground, but
to actually grow their wealth?
>> Okay, most of us do not know our basic
numbers. Money is so mystifying and
confusing, often by design, but also by
a lack of
uh effort that we put into it, that when
I ask people, "What's your household
income?" You know, 50% of people do not
even know their own household income.
What people typically discover when they
calculate their four key numbers is that
they have way too much money going
towards fixed costs. That would be
things like their housing, which is a
huge problem, especially now, towards
their cars. Americans love to buy
gargantuan
$85,000
and then,
you know, they go, "Oh, that's just
normal." They also discover that they
don't have a lot in savings. And when we
look at how much they're automatically
saving every month, it's usually zero.
What a blessing
to be able to go, "Oh, it's very clear
why we don't have any savings because we
are not saving." Now that we understand
the basics, we can make some changes.
>> And just for just to be clear, what are
the the four key numbers?
>> The first is your fixed costs, anything
that is fixed to keep the lights on. So,
your rent or mortgage, your auto
payments, debt, groceries, the things
that you use every day and they're going
to stay there. The next one is your
savings. How much are you saving? These
are as a percentage of your take-home
pay.
The third is your investments. That's
where the real wealth is created. And
finally is guilt-free spending. This is
eating out, traveling,
anything that you like to do for you or
for your family, 20 to 35%. If you hit
those numbers,
call it a day and move on cuz you are
nailing it.
>> Well, have you always had a healthy
relationship with money? What's your
personal relationship with money?
>> It has evolved over time. I think that I
You know, it's funny. I struggled with
math when I was younger well, to the
same extent today. I struggle with
rotating things in my head and puzzles.
But for some reason compound interest
just made sense to me. And it was early.
You know, my dad helped me open up a
investment account at age 14. And
instantly I'm putting in, you know, 20
bucks, 50 bucks, 100 bucks, and I'm
already compounding it until 65. I go,
"Whoa, this is amazing."
So, [snorts]
that part, I think, for whatever reason,
that was a talent that I had.
But I was also a utilitarian.
I was the kind of guy where in his early
20s, if you looked in my apartment,
there's nothing on the wall, maybe one
poster, no frame, cuz why would I?
That's just a waste of time and money,
right? And
And I was living in San Francisco, so I
think it's kind of a common sentiment,
just like focus on efficiency.
And now I would say I'm the furthest
from that idea.
>> And how old are you?
>> 43.
>> But you're you're not one of these FIRE
guys, the financially It's financial
independence retire early. Um
Would And And there are people who sort
of relentlessly are working their
financial numbers so they know at some
point
as young as as they can possibly do it,
they can stop working and just live off
their investments.
What do you think they're missing? Like
you are sort of critical of the FIRE
mindset. What what's the what's the
criticism there?
>> What I appreciate is that the FIRE
community pushes people to think
in a different way. And in America,
anything that gets people to engage with
their money, I'm
initially for it.
I think that they took the average
savings rate which Americans have
roughly three less than 5% and they
said, "How about 30%? How about 50%?"
That's pretty bold, which I appreciate.
But I do think that if you build a life
where you focus solely on a number in a
spreadsheet, that is a mistake. There
are far too many people who go through
life
ultra frugal
and over time their ability to spend
money meaningfully atrophies.
For a lot of people, it can be as simple
as, "Hey, every time I come home there's
a bunch of shoes on the floor. I'm
tripping over LEGOs. Let me spend 20
bucks on a little organizer to put those
shoes in there. Wow. Or let me spend a
little bit of money to make my life
slightly more convenient so I can have
quality time. Or let me just tip 30%
everywhere I go. I want to be super
generous to the people that are taking
care of me at the coffee shop, etc. at
at the restaurant."
I want us to get deeper than thinking
that rich or spending money is frivolous
or somehow unimportant. It's not.
>> I want to
go back to
the beginning of your career for a
little bit. So you've been doing this or
talking about money for 20 years and you
started blogging I think in roughly 2004
when you were still at Stanford. The
blog evolved into
the best-selling book I will teach You
to Be Rich, which was published in 2009,
which is sort of become one of these
books
that are perennial best-sellers. But,
when did this switch
happen where you decided to talk
specifically to couples about money? I
was wondering, you know, it's like
there's only so many ways that you can
say, you know, pay off your debt, you
know,
spend on the things that matter, buy
low-cost index funds, do the employer
401k match. You know, did you think, oh,
I need to find another
lane for for the material?
>> I think that money is so
multi-dimensional that I can talk about
this for the rest of my life. But, the
advice to me was relatively
one-dimensional. It was, here's a
spreadsheet,
put some numbers in it, and God bless.
And I actually think that uh money is
alive. It is like relational. And that's
when my relationship focus started was
several years ago.
Um
my wife and I
met,
talked about money a little late.
Uh I broke my own rules on that one.
I should have done it earlier. That was
that was a violation of my own rules.
>> What your own rule about what?
>> Talk about money early.
>> Oh.
>> Earlier. And anyway, so we we finally
talked about it. Um and we went through
a pre-nup process, which was
um
challenging. And then we got married,
and you don't stop talking about money
when you get married. It's actually only
the beginning. And so, I discovered how
challenging it was, and I'm I will teach
you to be rich guy. And I'm like, if
this is hard for us,
let me ask other couples. So, I started
asking all these couples, how do you
talk about money? Who handles it?
Um what do you disagree on? And it was
like the earth started shaking because
there's all these taboo stories that
nobody talks about publicly and whenever
there's a taboo around money, I pull out
my flashlight and I want to shine a
light on it.
>> Do you think every couple should have a
pre-nup?
>> No.
Most couples don't need it. If one or
both partners come into a relationship
with
pre-existing assets or any sort of
complexity, then it may make sense. It's
worth looking into, but the vast
majority of people do not need it.
>> So,
when you speak to couples about their
money problems and they're talking about
specific ones, like what are what are
the most common problems that you come
across
where like actually the problem is not
the money, it's what the money
represents
between the the couple.
>> It's
usually represents something much
deeper. So, a classic example that
happens all the time is
couples do not talk about money, but
what they do talk about is we have this
expense that just came up.
We've got to send her on a field trip or
we're taking a trip to grandma's next
month.
Where's the money going to come from?
And it produces and reinforces this
feeling that we only talk about money
when there's a problem. So, what we have
to do is rebuild this relationship.
Where are you today?
They're like, I don't know.
I go, all right, do you know how much
you're going to have at 65? They have no
clue. So, I do a little compound
interest calculation for them. And I
tell them how much they're going to
have. And sometimes
they are shocked because the number, if
you compound over 10, 20, 30, 40 years,
that number becomes quite large and they
they realize through more discussion
that this argument they have about who
spent too much at Target
is completely
absurd when you're talking about having
that kind of retirement.
>> But I'm also interested in what's
underneath the
uh you spent too much money at Target.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Uh uh conversation which
>> Classic.
>> Right? Which could be, you know, maybe
the person who's being critical, maybe
they are actually controlling and they
want to be they want to oversee all the
spending. Maybe the person who's doing
the spending
uh feels like uh spending is a is a way
of sort of
exercising power in their own way. So so
what are what are those sorts of
dynamics that you see recurring in the
couples that you talk to?
>> There are psychological dynamics, there
are gender dynamics, cultural dynamics
at play. It is the most fascinating part
of what I do. So Target is actually a
very real example. It's very common that
usually in a heterosexual relationship
um the wife will go to Target
and it's almost a running joke that she
will go in with the intention to spend
$50 and come out having spent $250. This
is actually a meme online. Haha, I spent
$250.
And that produces a lot of conflict.
Several reasons. One, the husband who's
often not involved in the daily tracking
of anything or knowledge of what's being
spent, he just looks at a number and
goes, "Why did you do that?" The person
who spends the money in this case, wife,
becomes quite defensive. "What do you
mean? I'm out here going shopping every
day, taking care of things." And so now
we have an entrenched conflict where
there's no understanding of the dollars
or the vision, just "Why'd you do that?"
And it reverses
in gender as well. We will often hear
guys spending money at a gas station.
This is quite common. They go every
morning, they're buying snacks, drinks
at a gas station. "Why'd you do that? We
can make it at home."
So
they over time come to realize that what
they are spending
either they can easily afford it, so why
are we arguing about this? Or this is
not the vision for our rich life. And
candidly, sometimes I'll just tell them
like
is Target your rich life?
And
I have to say I don't think buying a
bunch of commodities
can be a core part of your rich life. In
fact, I've never heard somebody say
Target is my rich life.
It's just not. Spending time with your
kids,
being able to volunteer with them,
buying something beautiful that you
appreciate, even going out and splurging
for a meal and getting an extra
appetizer. Yes, that can be part of a
rich life. A lot of people have told me
that.
But buying some stuff at a random store,
probably not.
>> You know, I have to say that sometimes
when I
uh
think in sort of a
when I've been thinking in a broader way
about your work, particularly your work
with couples. And I see these couples
come on and to all outward appearances,
you know, they're they look like they
should be doing well and they're they're
having they're really struggling. Like
people talking about maybe losing their
house or sort of the specter of divorce
can come up because of tensions around
money or people really anxious about not
being able to
um provide uh
the same life for their kids that that
they were able to have. And that's sort
of on on one side of it. And then on the
other side, you have people who have a
lot of money, but they seem completely
like coiled and unable to to enjoy it.
And I think this is actually painting a
in whole, kind of a grim portrait of
American society. [laughter]
Like there's
like
What do What do you think
your podcast
is saying about American society writ
large? Like if an alien were to come
down and watch Ramit Sethi's show, what
what would the takeaway be?
>> It's no surprise to me that
money is fraught
and that you're pointing out even the
people I have on the podcast who are
multi-millionaires
>> aren't happy.
>> Yeah, they're not happy.
And and
you look at it from the outside and you
go, that is shocking. Sometimes you look
like it's so obvious why you have these
financial problems. Like I have couples,
they are 2 months away from literally
running out of money. 2 months. And they
have kids. Okay? They will lose their
house, they will lose their multiple
vehicles, they are months away from it.
And they're remarkably lackadaisical
about it.
They have never really faced any
consequences.
Think about it. Many of us
still have our cell phones
still have our internet at home
still have a a home.
So, it may be stressful but when I ask
them, what are the consequences that you
have faced?
Uh I have $25,000 of credit card debt. I
go, how does that affect you day-to-day?
Nothing. It's just a number.
What I am trying to do with my work is
to bring the reality of money from the
clouds to the street. Meaning
money is not just a word. It's not just
all let's improve our portfolio or like
debt is bad.
I want to know what would it feel like
to go to the grocery store and be free
to pick up an extra treat for your
family. What [snorts] would it feel like
if you and your partner when you talked
about money
you actually started with a compliment
and you ended with a hug. What would
that feel like? Not a fight, not sullen
silence, but wow, that was really cool.
>> It doesn't
just in in listening to you give that
answer, it also doesn't help that we
clearly live in a society that thinks
people who have money are
better than people who don't have it.
And also deserve you know, people think
they deserve to have more money
than the people who don't have it.
>> It's a bizarre relationship. If you were
to explain it to aliens,
we love the wealthy in America.
We agulate them. We look at their
pictures in Bora Bora.
>> aspire to be them.
>> We aspire to be them.
But we hate them.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> We hate them. We hate them for evading
tax increases. We hate them for being
evil capitalists. And
these simple labels actually do us a
disservice. You want to be good at
money, you better learn how it works.
You better learn how it works on the
individual level. We're talking about
your four key numbers, your debt payoff
date. You got to know these things. And
we need to understand that
just cuz you have money does not mean
you are evil or bad.
But
if you have billions and you argue
against paying a slight marginal tax
increase,
you might be an
>> I I
want to know about your
political evolution a little bit.
>> I'm no expert on the space, but you
know, I think one of the the big
sort of like the heavyweights is a guy
like Dave Ramsey, right? Who who is sort
of like it has a good old boy vibe and I
think he's he's sort of
publicly pretty pro-Trump.
>> Was there some point in your career
in which you consciously thought, "Oh, I
like there is a lane for somebody to
talk about money who seems
politically
different than Dave's Dave Ramsey. Like
there's there's like a
uh a left-coded version of that guy, and
I want to be him.
>> No. My political outspokenness was more
at my revulsion at what Donald Trump was
saying. You know, he was calling
Mexicans rapists and saying other
horrific things,
and I realized in that moment, if I
cannot speak up,
somebody who runs their own business,
who has a large platform, somebody who
looks like me,
then who can?
For the most part, the personal finance
world, particularly in the media, has
often been right-wing coded. Personal
finance personalities will bring people
on their show who are making obviously
poor financial decisions.
They will subject them to mockery over
and why did you do that? How could you
spend that much? And they will
essentially present the message that
it's all your fault.
>> You know what that couple is? That
couple's screwed.
Because life doesn't turn out exactly
like your little plan.
Ever.
>> Now,
I believe that we should take personal
responsibility for our money. Yes, 100%.
That's why I talk about savings rate,
and I call people out when they're
spending more than they have,
but we can simultaneously acknowledge
that and the need for systemic reform.
You will not hear the need for systemic
reform on many personal finance media
platforms. You will not hear them
talking about why housing is so
expensive. It's not just cuz, it's
because of NIMBYism, because of a
political decision that we've made. You
will not hear them talking about raising
money taxes on billionaires, even though
taxes are historically low.
No, [snorts] you will hear them simply
saying, you spend too much on oats every
morning, and you're a bad person.
I find that to be nonsensical.
When you understand that society is not
simply
a
uh
a culmination of people making
individual decisions, but there are
structural reasons that we are the way
we are. Structural.
Then suddenly you start to realize, oh,
money is much more nuanced and
interesting, and you actually become a
lot more compassionate about it.
>> Well, this is something that maybe
relates to
the kind of uh personal political change
you you just described. When I was
reading I Will Teach You to Be Rich, you
know, you it I I understand this this
book was now written, you know, 17 years
ago. Uh
uh But you know, you write about the
problem of uh victim culture. And you
you sort of suggest that people who
complain about systemic and societal or
structural problems related to personal
finance are like whiners, you know.
>> Whoa, whoa, hold on, hold on. That's not
what I said. This is an introduction.
>> Yeah.
>> I did talk about victim culture, which
when I initially wrote it in 2007
was
a fine thing to say. Now it has become
right-coded, but I never said that
you're a victim because you're
complaining about social structures.
No.
There is a an amount of personal
responsibility that we have to take with
our money. So we cannot simply say life
is too hard. I'm not going to read a
single book about money or watch a free
YouTube video. Somebody solve it for me.
That's not going to happen. We got to
take personal responsibility.
>> Well, so what what are the valid
structural reasons for why some people
struggle to get ahead? Can we give
credence to someone who says like, look,
the the the game is rigged against me.
I could I could follow every step that
Ramit Sethi tells me to take, and I'm
I'm still going to struggle to get my
head above water, or
or would we look at somebody who says
something like that and say like, you
know, you're you're just not making the
right moves.
>> Mhm.
>> You know, that's this is such a great
question. No, I would not look at them
and say you're not making the right
moves. I think first of all, we need to
acknowledge, for example, the jobs even
for college-educated graduates
are scarce and the pay is not what they
need to do to survive. And housing, of
course, is the biggest one of all. We
have systematically made it more
expensive by letting people
who bought a house and then pulled up
the drawbridges around them, not
allowing more housing to be built. We
have a policy decision to let wealthy
typically older people
protect their house value while younger
people cannot afford a basic house.
And if you take a look at some young
person and they're like, "Hey, I can
barely afford my housing and I already
live with a roommate."
It's not fair to tell them, "Oh, you're
not doing enough." No, this is something
that happened around you. You were not
even aware of it or a participant in it
>> [snorts]
>> and you are the one bearing the brunt of
it.
>> And what would be the the sort of
inverse of of a question like that
where, you know, the sort of the the
millennial or the Gen Z person who says
like, "Look, the the
the system is such that I'm going to
struggle more than my parents or my
grandparents. You know,
what would you point to and say like,
"No, here's the myth about that
thinking."
>> I would ask them
what have you read
to improve
your personal finances?
Right there, boom. There is at least one
thing that anybody can do in America
that will have a profound effect on your
finances.
Usually, the simplest answer is to
automate your savings. Just pulling
aside a certain amount of money before
you ever see it. People go, "There's no
way I can do that. I'm already cut to
the bone." You will be shocked at how
much you can actually survive on and
even thrive on and the money's just
automatically growing for you. You don't
even know it. That's powerful. That
takes understanding psychology and
automation, but anyone can do it in less
than 2 days.
>> If if we can say that
sort of getting ahead financially is
harder for
uh millennials and and Gen Z'ers than it
was for older generations.
What advice would you give to parents
for how best
to help their kids? I mean, maybe just
give them as much money as you're able
to give them?
>> Yeah, write them a big fat check if you
can.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh it's actually not too far from it.
You know, the in the old days in the old
days the idea was I'll pass whatever I
have along when I die. And
more sophisticated uh
financial planners now know if you have
something to give
giving
a few thousand dollars, ten thousand,
however much is much more impactful when
your children are younger, particularly
when they're 35, 40, 45. Those are
really tough financial times for people.
But look, the best thing that older
parents can do is to actually ask their
children and legitimately learn
what is going on financially for young
people cuz it is not the same. And I am
tired of hearing these comments, "Oh, we
bought a house when it was 17%
interest." Yeah, the houses were a
fraction of what they cost today. And if
you look at what they were as a
percentage of income, they were way
lower. It was achievable. We know this
because there are a lot of people who
bought a very nice house on one income.
That is effectively impossible today
thanks to NIMBYism. So, actually just
asking your children, "Hey, I know it's
really tough right now. Can you just
like what's it like? How much are you
spending on food and housing? And how
does that break down? And oh my gosh,
here's what we spent." "Wow, if I had to
do that today, I don't know how I would
do it." There is power in just
acknowledging and validating and there
are so many young people who would love
to hear their parents just say, "Wow,
that's got to be really tough. I had no
idea."
>> Ramit, if you could snap your fingers
and go into the minds of every American
and get them to change one behavior
around money that will help them put
them on the path to a richer life, what
would that be?
>> Once a month.
One hour.
Set it aside.
If you're solo or with your with a
partner,
look at your key numbers.
Ask yourself,
"What's my rich life? Has anything
changed since last month?
Am I on track?
And what progress have I made?"
Then celebrate.
That's it.
>> All right, I'll do that with my wife
once a month for an hour and I'll report
back to you.
>> I would love it.
>> Um Ramit, thank you for taking all the
time to speak with me.
>> It was a total pleasure. Thank you.
>> [music]
>> I'm Lulu Garcia-Navarro.
>> And I'm David Marchese.
>> And we're the hosts of The Interview, an
audio and video podcast from The New
York Times.
>> Every week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life.
>> Subscribe to our YouTube channel [music]
so you'll never miss an episode.